---
layout: page
permalink: /teaching/
title: teaching
description: Teaching Statement.
nav: true
nav_order: 6
---

I am a Hydrologist and current Ph.D. candidate focused on advancing groundwater representation in land surface models to improve weather prediction. My teaching experience includes serving as a teaching assistant (TA) for courses in Fluid Mechanics, Environmental Spatial Data Analysis, and Hydrosystem Modeling at Duke University and Universidad de Los Andes in Colombia.

I’ve been a guest lecturer in the courses of Hydrology, Hydrosystem Modeling, and River Hydraulics. I have experience teaching in both laboratory environments for undergraduate students and lecture settings for graduate students. I consider my teaching philosophy to be one of fostering intuition and building structured knowledge through problem-solving strategies, with a particular interest in exploring the applicability and limitations of key concepts within surface hydrology, hydrometeorology, and hydroinformatics.

I prioritize values of transparency and respect when designing and planning learning activities. As a guest lecturer, the assignments I developed (for Hydrosystems Modeling and River Hydraulics) were grounded in real-world applications and closely aligned with the practical tools introduced during the sessions. To better communicate expectations regarding homework and lab reports, I created clear instructions that I previously shared with the students to ensure they understand the expectations and processes. I provided course material in advance, adapted explanations in response to confusion, and offered alternative examples as needed to accommodate diverse student needs [V3, K1]. I use positive reinforcement and active listening when responding to students’ questions, as well as encouraging open communication [V1]. As a TA in Fluid Mechanics, my approach in lab sessions included adapting guidelines in communication with the Faculty, sharing explicit expectations for student reports, and further supporting transparency and clarity [V5, K2].

The effectiveness of these strategies was reflected in the quality of student work, which I assessed in a timely manner with constructive feedback during the grading process. These practices help me create an equitable and engaging environment [K1].

I adopt an active and inclusive learning environment across both Lectures and labs. During lab sessions, I introduce the fundamental concepts behind each experiment, clearly outline the procedures, and prompt students to predict possible outcomes. I invite students to hypothesize explanations for observed phenomena, providing a supportive environment in which they can develop a deeper understanding. By allowing students to collaborate on experimental tasks, I encourage peer-to-peer learning and hands-on engagement [V2, K2]. In lectures, I incorporate animated material to capture students’ attention and facilitate an intuitive understanding of complex ideas [K4]. For more abstract topics, I encourage participation with open-ended questions and active listening, repeating back the question to the students. To promote equitable participation, I clearly communicate expectations for assignments, ensuring students understand the criteria for success [V1, K1].

I have observed that students engage more easily when allowed to apply concepts, share ideas, and reflect on their reasoning.

I see assessments as a key element in building a deeper understanding. In a lecture setting, I use concept checks to help me identify a starting point for the lecture and to clarify misconceptions [V3]. To ensure fairness and transparency, I provide clear assignment prompts and offer constructive feedback on lab reports and homework submissions. I also engage students in one-on-one assessment discussions to maintain academic integrity and clarify expectations for them [V2, K2]. Formative feedback is supported through digital platforms, such as Canvas, providing students with timely, written responses that they can use to improve their work [K4]. This helps students reflect on their learning and make meaningful progress. By promoting ongoing dialogue, my goal is to build a supportive and fair learning environment where feedback is used to drive growth.

As a TA, I enjoyed supporting students both inside and outside the classroom. I made myself available through in-person and virtual office hours to ensure I was accessible whenever needed. I assisted students with their academic projects and helped them understand degree requirements. I also enjoyed sharing insights about my field and informing students about opportunities and career paths available. Understanding that every student’s journey is unique, I focus on building trust by consistently using students’ names and showing genuine interest in their backgrounds, hobbies, and goals. I acknowledge their commitment and growth.

As part of the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers, I help connect students with their peers and organize informal meetups and cohort lunches, allowing students to build a sense of community. By openly sharing my own stories of struggle through my career path, I foster a space where reaching out for help is normalized, and mental health is prioritized.

I try to dedicate my teaching efforts to creating an environment where students feel comfortable making mistakes, viewing them as valuable opportunities for growth. I consider my teaching practices to be centered around respect, student well-being, and autonomy. I believe that genuine understanding occurs when students are allowed to explore and discover solutions on their own rather than simply receiving answers, since that has been my own experience. Beyond disciplinary knowledge, I aim to equip my students with resilience and empathy to contribute positively to a supportive community.
